Happy 2025 to all the listeners of AWS Bites podcast.
We are back from the holidays, recharged,
and ready to dive into another fascinating topic
in the world of cloud computing and AWS.
My name is Luciano, and today I'm joined by Eoin
to discuss a subject that we get asked about all the time.
How do I become a cloud architect?
And this is really important because the start of a new year
is the perfect time for resolutions and career shifts,
which makes it the ideal moment to explore
this exciting and rewarding career path.
While we don't claim to have all the perfect formula
to make you the perfect architect,
we are excited to share our personal experiences,
discuss the journey that led us to become cloud architects,
and outline what we believe are the key skills and traits
that are essential for aspiring cloud architects.
We'll map out a practical roadmap,
and we'll try to give you some of the details
that should guide you from zero to cloud architect in 2025.
And we will also try towards the end
to answer some commonly asked questions.
So let's tackle those new year resolution,
and let's jump right in.
AWS Bites is proudly brought to you by fourTheorem,
an AWS consulting partner dedicated to helping you
and your team to deliver successful projects on AWS.
With a sharp focus on performance and cost optimization,
we are here to ensure your cloud journey
is smooth and efficient.
If you're searching for a trusted partner
to bring your AWS projects to life,
visit us at fourtheorem.com,
and let's work together to make your vision a reality.
Okay, so before getting started,
I want to share some disclaimers just to set the stage.
We are experts on AWS,
and therefore this episode, of course,
is going to be focused on AWS.
Although this concept,
this topic of becoming a cloud architect,
of course, goes beyond just AWS.
Everything we're sharing today,
you can probably take most of it
and also apply it if you are exploring a career
for other cloud providers.
Maybe that's Google, maybe that's Azure,
maybe that's something else.
Hopefully, what we can share today
is mostly going to apply to all of that as well.
Now, becoming a cloud architect
isn't really or necessarily a straight path.
There are probably many, many different trajectories
that you can take to land there.
It's also a relatively new specialization.
We don't even think there is like
a canonical educational path
if you want to go through like a university
and just come out as a cloud architect.
We don't believe that that exists today.
So what we can do is we'll try to share our opinion
and our experience.
And hopefully after listening to this episode,
you'll know enough
and you can explore a little bit of the topic more
and eventually come up with a more complete view
and some kind of path that you can start to walk
to get closer to this goal.
As always, this is just the starting point
for our conversation.
So we are going to encourage you to ask any questions
or leave comments, share your experience.
And we want to turn this into something
that is driven by everyone
and not just by our opinion.
So please reach out.
Where do we start, Eoin?
Well, before we get into it, we could talk about why you might do it.
You might have your own motivation,
but in case you didn't,
we took a look at some market research as preparation.
There's a Gartner report
on the cloud professional services market.
And it estimates that cloud professional services,
of which this is a big part,
was valued at around $22 billion in 2023
and growing 16% every year,
expected to grow at that rate
for the next decade approximately.
And this growth is driven by a few different factors.
Of course, the increasing adoption of cloud computing,
governments and public sectors
doing all sorts of digital transformation initiatives
to catch up on their legacy tech,
integration of AI and IoT
into industries like financial services,
and of course,
just increasing internet connectivity all over the world.
So for aspiring cloud architects,
this growth really leads to a booming demand for expertise,
especially in large-scale cloud deployments
and customized solutions.
Because it's a growing market,
lots of people are going to be doing
this kind of activity for the first time.
So people who've done it before
and have the skills to guide people along the path
are going to be very valuable.
So all in all,
if you find this kind of work interesting,
there should be many,
many appealing career opportunities.
So maybe let's just think about
what does it mean to be a cloud architect?
If you look at Google Cloud,
they've got a definition.
Defining a cloud architect
as an IT expert responsible for developing,
implementing and managing
an organization's cloud architecture.
So I don't know if that really tells us
what we want to know,
but maybe we can go a bit deeper.
So a cloud architect should really understand
the specific characteristics of cloud environments,
because we're not just talking
about architecture in general.
That means crafting cloud architectures
and strategies that not only meet present needs,
but are optimized for future scalability,
performance, cost, security,
all of those pillars.
So what it means then is that
as a cloud architect,
you should understand
long-term business requirements
and be able to think about
what the architecture
and the cloud architecture means
and a strategy that can fulfill
those requirements today
but also iteratively
as it evolves towards that future.
But as cloud platforms,
your version one cloud platform
is always simpler
than it becomes over time.
They evolve.
Architectures will become
more complex and diverse.
And then you have each cloud provider
offering lots of different managed services.
So this really means
that cloud architects
do need to understand
like foundational architectural patterns,
which we'll talk a little bit more
about later,
but also be well-versed
in specific services
and trade-offs
for a chosen cloud provider.
And this is generally
why we believe
it's usually important
to focus on one cloud provider.
If you just take AWS alone,
it has a massive surface area
and it's unlikely
for one individual
to be able to master
everything in AWS alone.
So imagine trying
to be proficient
with multiple cloud providers
at the same level of expertise.
it's, yeah,
not really going to happen.
Yeah, so if I can try
to summarize what you just said
and maybe add a little bit more,
what we are saying
is that a cloud architect
should be able to understand
traditional system architecture
and distributed system,
then have an in-depth knowledge
of a specific cloud provider,
let's say AWS, Azure, Google,
whatever you prefer,
but pick one and stick to it.
Also probably needs to have
some good programming skills.
Doesn't have to be
the most well-versed
software engineer,
but at least should be proficient
with a scripted language
like Python or JavaScript
to be able to write
some kind of automation
or maybe write some code
in terms of application code
whenever it's needed.
And then there are a mix
of foundational pieces of knowledge
that I think are required,
for instance,
networking concepts,
what is TCP, IP, DNS, HTTP,
what a CDN does,
all that kind of stuff
becomes more and more important
as you start to build
more advanced architecture.
Security, we mentioned,
is always a requirement
that's coming up
and these days even more so.
And that includes understanding
identity, access management,
encryption, again,
networking in the sense
of making network secure.
Compliance as well
is another topic
that always comes up,
especially if you work
in highly regulated industries.
So an architect needs to have
at least a basic understanding
of what the different
compliance regulations
are kind of forcing you
to do in your designs,
but also operative systems
because of course,
this is especially true
for Linux
because it tends to be
the most used one
when it comes to the cloud
and application servers.
So you probably need
to understand
some degree of all of that
because almost every time
when you're doing compute,
although today,
maybe if you're using servers,
there are several degrees
of abstraction,
but then you always end up
needing some of that knowledge.
And that means
you need to understand
what are the basics
of the operative system,
how does a process start,
memories versus storage.
probably you need
to understand about containers
because that's also
another common abstraction
that you might end up using.
Even if you're using,
I don't know,
Fargate, for instance,
which tends to be
pretty abstracted,
you still need to understand
containers really well.
And even more so
if you end up using
something like Kubernetes,
for example.
Then data storage
and databases,
that probably means
understanding the difference
between SQL and NoSQL,
or maybe even thinking
about big data
and data lakes,
how do you design for those
and when do you need
one versus the other.
And of course,
the main point is
that you don't need
to be a master
in all of these topics
because of course
there is a massive surface there
and it's going to take you
years and years
to become proficient
with all of them
and probably even unfeasible
to become extremely proficient
in all these areas.
But at least you need
to understand the basic concepts
and try to think
what are the pros and cons
of all the different approaches
and be able to come up
with a design
that makes sense
when you bring
all these different pieces together.
Of course,
you're not going to be
working alone,
you will be working in a team
and you'll be trying
to draw expertise
from all the components
in your team.
So probably you're going
to have people
that are experienced
that really,
really experienced
with databases,
for example.
You will be drawing
their experience
whenever you need
to design something
at a lower level
and you need more expertise.
And that's something
that of course
you need to apply
at all the different areas.
Which kind of leads us
to the next part
which is there are
lots of soft skills
that are required as well
because of course
you need to work
with a lot of different people
and this is not just technical
but most often
you also need to work
with business people
which means that
you need to have
some degree
of business acumen.
So you need to
understand business requirements
and objectives.
So you need to understand
how a business works
and why certain decisions
are made in a business.
And then from the technology
perspective,
what can you do
to support those decisions
short term versus long term?
And this involves sometimes
taking kind of short term tactics
but at the same time
having a vision
for a long term strategy
that allows the business
to succeed long term.
All of that stuff
requires good communication skills.
So can you talk technically
with other technical stakeholders
but can you talk
a little bit less technically
with business stakeholders
and make sure
that you can bridge the gap
between those two worlds
which effectively means
communicate clearly.
It's like one of the main things
that you can develop
from a soft skill perspective.
And in more general terms
we can also talk about
problem solving.
At the end of the day
architecture is
one of the many ways
that you can think about
problem solving in technology.
It's maybe
at a little bit
of a larger scale
when it's compared
to a single application.
When you're thinking
about architecture
we are solving
a problem
generally a business problem
with an entire system
in this case
in the cloud.
So being able
to understand
what is exactly
the problem
we are trying to solve
and what are
the main challenges
and then build from there
I think is going to be
a very very important skill.
One of the questions you might have is
then if you have
an architect role
who is responsible
for architecture?
Is it always just
the architect role?
Do you have to be
an architect to architect
or is architecture
like a collaborative
function of an entire team?
And if so
what's the role
of the architect
within that team?
Is it a final decision maker
or is it a facilitator
of architectural decisions?
Now while a designated
architect
with the official title
often leads the charge
decisions impact
the entire team
and beyond the team
therefore the entire team
should participate
in that process.
That's something
we would really believe
very strongly.
Different roles
and different backgrounds
and levels of experience
and even looking
at developers,
operations,
security engineers,
testers,
product owners
they all bring unique
insights that are crucial
for creating robust
and effective architectures.
Even if an architect
has the most experience
it doesn't mean
that other people
on the team
don't have experiences
they don't have.
So it is important
to be open
and regard it
as a collaborative activity.
You have to resist
the idea of an ivory tower
architect
that makes the decisions
and hands them down
for teams to implement.
And that way
isn't going to be
a very productive
or a very enjoyable
place to work.
Even if you're not
an architect
you should be able
to contribute significantly
to architectural decisions
through your daily work.
Even as a junior developer
you should start
to try and think about this
and trying to understand
how can I contribute here.
If you have something
to say that you feel
is relevant to the architecture
you should be open
to doing that
and your organisation
should be open
to you doing that too.
When everybody participates
then you get this sense
of collective ownership
we've talked a good few
times about before
and responsibility
for the architecture
so you've got a lot
more buy-in
a lot more satisfaction
and you end up
with a much more
effective implementation
and maintenance
into the future
then as well.
Of course
if one person
has the architectural view
and every decision
has to go through them
you end up with a bottleneck
that can slow down
development significantly
and make the architecture brittle.
A team-led approach
will mitigate that.
So in a way
you could say
that everyone could
and should contribute
to the cloud architecture efforts.
It's not a solo act
it is more of a team sport.
What's more important
for an architect
in the context
is to set the vision
and help to get mutual agreement
on what it is
you're trying to achieve
in order to provide value
to think about
the architectural strategy
how you're doing it
and how it's going to evolve
into the future
as business needs evolve
and then things like
setting guiding principles
like scalability
security
maintainability
and other illities
that can guide
teams decisions.
It can also be guiding
frameworks for deciding
on technologies
to make it easier
for people
to not get stuck
with analysis paralysis
every time they need
to pick up a new tool
to do something
and also maybe encouraging
people to avoid
technology sprawl
by having unique decisions
every time you go
to look at
answering a problem.
You know,
architecture fundamentally
it's like a game
of trade-offs
and I think
more experienced architects
understand
that there's always
trade-offs in everything
and that includes
when it comes to
decision-making
and collaboration
so you have to
kind of understand
and read the room
as to when it's
a good time
to get people's
opinion on board
and spend more time
discussing
and also be able
to say
okay,
the time for discussion
has happened now
and we need to
actually work together
towards a decision
and facilitate
that discussion
moving towards
a conclusion
so that you can
actually get to work
and so there's a lot
of skills involved
in there
but a lot of that
will come with experience
so if you are
an aspiring architect
that means that
even with your current role
you're already
getting experience
and you could probably
find opportunities
to do architect stuff.
Maybe we can take
now a little bit
of a segue
and share
some of our stories
how did we become
cloud architects
actually we do have
an entire episode
dedicated to our
personal journey
that led us
to become
experience in AWS
and eventually
become AWS cloud architects
so we'll defer
to that one
for the details
but I think it's still
useful to share
a little bit
of a quick summary
just to give you
two practical examples
of how can you
end up becoming
a cloud architect
and it will
might be very different
for you
but at least you have
some reference points
and you can draw
hopefully some inspirations
by the way
that episode
is episode 91
and we will have
the link in the show notes
if you want to deep dive
on our personal careers
I'm gonna take a stab
starting my one
I think I consider myself
very lucky
because I discovered
my passion for coding
computers in general
when I was very young
at the age of 12
I was accidentally
playing with
a i386 computer
and I realized
there was QBasic
installed
and I happened to have
a book that was
describing like
how do you do
like an L award
and then how do you
draw a Christmas tree
this kind of silly things
that I eventually
got that eventually
got myself into
enjoying coding
and build this stuff
and I think since then
I never stopped
learning and I ended up
eventually starting
a career as a web developer
in between I was also
studying and I decided
to take a degree
in computer science
which is something
that I think helped me
to have a strong
foundation in programming
and software engineering
in general
and I was also
working while studying
so I ended up
working in various
software engineering
and web development roles
and I continued that
of course after my degree
so I think I had
more of a decade
or something close to that
of experience
in different environments
as an employee
working for various companies
working as a freelance
I even had my own startup
which failed miserably
but that's an entirely
different story
that I'm not going to
cover today
and at some point
in my career
after all these things
I think was around 2016
I found myself
working in a small startup
that needed to build
a product in the cloud
and I think it was
quite a unique opportunity
for me
because in that team
which was a very small team
I think we were
like four developers
nobody really had
strong expertise
with the cloud
so we kind of had
to figure it out together
and deploy something
on AWS
which was a bit scary
because of course
we felt the responsibility
but at the same time
by taking the leap
it was the first step
for me to start to
learn and embrace
this new world
which I think
eventually led me
to become an AWS expert
also fair to say
that we were not
necessarily alone
all the time
we used a consulting company
that helped us
to kind of set
the foundation right
which is another reason
why you should consider
doing that
if you find yourself
in this situation
where you need
to do something on AWS
you don't necessarily
have all the expertise
in house
an external company
can help you
to set the foundation right
and quickly upskill
your team
so I found that experience
very useful
when I was
on the other side
at that time
so I guess
from that moment on
I always found myself
doing more and more
AWS
both as personal interest
but also because
I ended up working
in more companies
where we were
effectively shipping
more and more complex
products on AWS
and while I was doing that
I was trying to learn
as much as possible
not just about
building web apps
for the cloud
but also
how do you architect
entire systems
with multiple components
to run smoothly
in the cloud
in a secure way
scalable way
doing all the observability
all this kind of stuff
that I think eventually
is the main responsibility
of a cloud architect
so after I think
a few years
of all of that
probably about
four to five years
I joined for theorem
and at that point
I got an official title
of cloud architect
so thank you for theorem
for giving me the trust
but I want to say
that even though
now this is the title
I still get to code
almost every day
it's something
that I enjoy doing
and I think
it's a fundamental
thing for an architect
to still be able
to build
not just design
but actually
keep building
together
with the rest
of the team
so I think
it's one last thing
I want to mention
is that
throughout all this journey
I always looked
for opportunity
to do content creation
maybe just because
it's something else
that I enjoy doing
and but at the same time
maybe I didn't realize that
but I think that helped
a lot my journey
into becoming an architect
because in many ways
it kind of helped me
to develop
communication skills
I ended up delivering
talks at various conferences
I even co-authored
a couple of books
and I think all of this stuff
in a way or another
gives you the skills
that you need
when you need to communicate
in a verbal
or in a written form
with your peers
whether these are technical
or from the business side
I think that's something
you need to figure out
how do I improve
on that skill
and in my case
that was content creation
in the broader sense
this was maybe
a little bit longer
than I expected
but I'll switch to you Eoin
I don't know if we do it again next year
it'll be even longer
because the story
isn't finished yet
yeah I mean
I also have a
fairly privileged
and fortunate background
in that
got into programming early
and also studied
computer science
which really
you know
gave a good foundation
I didn't appreciate it
at the time at all
but never really thought
much about architecture
until I got into industry
and started working
because it was all about
programming and software development
and I didn't really understand
what a software architect was
we had some
when I was in college
did start learning
about design patterns
and pattern languages
and how all that stuff evolved
but it's not really
until you understand
especially building
larger systems
which you don't always
get exposure to
early on
actually in my career
I think one of the things
that shaped my biases
that I have now
was for many years
I built a lot of systems
and most of them
a remarkable number of them
never made it
really into the real world
and that can happen
you know
you can
a lot of software
does not make it
into production
or doesn't make it
either because it's in a startup
or because it's
you work on
versions of systems
or innovative projects
that just don't make it
out into the real world
and after
you know
a good few years
in the industry
I looked back
and thought
wow
like there's actually
very little of the work
that I've been involved in
that really made it
into the real world
and that kind of led me to
I suppose
more of a
contrarian
approach
as an architect
where
always question the value
of what we're doing
before we're doing it
and wonder if it's
really worth doing
and because I just
after a time I said
okay I'm going to have
to flip this ratio
and ensure that the
systems I work on
most of them
are going to see
the light of day
and not end up
on a shelf gathering dust
after working as a developer
for years
I was constantly thinking
of well
I should think about
becoming a senior developer
and then an architect
as if there's this
natural progression
and you're just
ticking off boxes
on the way
and when I look back
now like I'm still
developing as a developer
as there is no
milestone really
I can say I've reached
at any different point
it's just after a bit
of experience
you feel more and more
comfortable
doing all these
different roles
and I don't feel
like I'm there yet
in any regard
on any of these things
it's just constantly
learning
and either becoming
more comfortable
with them
or just getting more
uncomfortable with
imposter syndrome
or not knowing
what you're doing
that always helps
right
because some
ultimately
architecture is often
just a question
of making decisions
and being able
to make a decision
doesn't just mean
that you know
what you're doing
it means that
you've got the ability
to say okay
there's different
trade-offs here
but let's just
pick something
and run with it
and then if it
doesn't work
we'll try something
else
I don't know
if that was
a clearer description
of my journey
but that's certainly
what comes to mind
right now
yeah it's super interesting
I like that
you took a slightly
step-by-step approach
and tried to give
a little bit more
of a guidance
on what are the
things that matter
or at least
what are the things
that matter
in your journey
that led you
where you are today
but let's get back
now into something
a little bit more
practical
because we want
to share
a potential path
and some resources
that might help you
if you are really
decided now
that architecture
cloud architecture
is what you want
to achieve
this year
starting this year
what are the steps
that you can follow
and again
remember the disclaimer
that this is just
a suggestion
it's not necessarily
the most complete
or the most structured
path
just things
that you can draw from
so one thing
that is worth
mentioning
is that
if you are already
a software developer
maybe already
working in the cloud
you are already
on a great path
so that's a great
starting point
because that means
that you are already
getting lots of experience
and this is setting you up
for making the leap
and becoming
a cloud architect
so one thing
that you could start to do
and you are probably
already doing
maybe without realizing it
is trying to gain
more experience
with as many
solutions
systems
architecture
environments
as possible
because effectively
being able to recognize
different options
and the pros
and cons
of every option
is one of the main
qualities
that an architect
needs to have
because it kind of
gives you that
breadth and depth
of understanding
of how different
systems work
and how can they
be connected together
but of course
this is not
necessarily a starting point
maybe you are starting
from somewhere else
maybe you are even
transitioning from
a totally different career
that's still fine
it doesn't mean
you cannot achieve the goal
the goal is still
totally achievable
but maybe you need
to follow a little bit
of a more structured
approach
where you need to figure out
exactly what to learn
and then of course
as you keep learning
and as you keep practicing
eventually you will have
enough confidence
and enough knowledge
to be on the job
with the title
so of course
this is going to take some time
it's not going to happen
everything on day one
so be patient
and try to dedicate
a little bit of time
consistently
and eventually
you'll get there
my other suggestion
is that there is always
a struggle between
theory and practice
it's difficult to find
a good balance
but I think it is important
to have both
some people just focus
totally on the practice
and they miss some
important theory aspects
also the opposite can happen
you do only theory
you think you know everything
and then when you try
to do something in practice
you don't even know
where to start
so trying to find a balance
and my suggestion would be
learn something
from the theory
but in small steps
and then try to have
practical experience
as quick as possible
to consolidate those learnings
so with that being said
let's focus on
some resources
that can guide you
along the way
I think
if you want to focus
just on cloud
and architecture aspects
there are two great resources
that I want to suggest
one is the AWS
well-architected framework
something that we have
been speaking about before
there is an entire episode
episode 68
that talks about
the structure
of the well-architected framework
what it does
and why AWS created this
but just as a quick summary
it's effectively
a piece of documentation
with lots of resources
for architects
and aspiring architects
that is structured
in multiple pillars
covering things
like operational excellence
so how do you run
and monitor systems
security
reliability
for instance
how do you design
for failure
performance
cost optimization
and the more recent one
is sustainability
so how do you design
systems that are sustainable
so this is a great resource
absolutely recommended
so go and check it out
whenever you have time
the other one
is actually from Azure
so maybe a little bit surprising
for people that follow
this podcast
but I think it's a very
very good resource
so absolutely worth a shout
and it's called
Azure Cloud Design Patterns
and it's just a documentation page
in the Azure website
we'll have a link
in the show notes
which illustrates
a few common design fallacies
that people do
in regular software engineering
but I would say
even more so
in the cloud
which are things like
assuming that the network
is always reliable
bandwidth is always infinite
topology never changes
all these kind of
common mistakes
that when you actually
start to think
that those assumptions
are not true
actually that's when
you start to go deeper
into your architecture
and think
okay
if this thing
is never going to be
100% reliable
how can I design
my solution
to also be
somewhat available
when things are not
reliable around it
and of course
it's not an easy
thing to do
but just thinking
about it
is going to give you
lots of ideas
and then of course
you can look at the industry
and figure out
how other people
are solving
this kind of problems
and that's why
I also like
this specific resource
because it gives you
a list of common
architectural patterns
that with very good
descriptions and examples
that you can quickly browse
and just have a feeling
for how many
solutions already exist
in the industry
and you can often
just take those solutions
and combine them together
to solve your specific problems
and just to give you
some examples
I'm talking about
for instance
the anti-corruption layer
CQRS
orchestration
versus choreography
the request response
patterns
synchronous and asynchronous
so all this stuff
I think it's something
that you will find yourself
using every day
when thinking about
architectures
distributed systems and kind of systems thinking
system architecture
is another important thing
to think about
cloud architectures
or systems ultimately
and you need to connect
different building blocks
to come up with a scale
of a solution
so that really means
not just for cloud architecture
but any modern architecture
understanding messaging
like pull versus push
event brushes
queuing systems
we've a suite of episodes
on those for AWS
and then also fault tolerance
for inter-process communication
data persistence
retries
item potency
circuit breakers
all that kind of stuff
in general
every problem
might have a few
different solutions
so you'll need to
generally have a good
understanding of
different patterns
and the trade-offs
in terms of performance
security
robustness
cost
etc
this way you could pick
the most fitting approach
for the specific problem at hand
and we'll have some resources
some great books
that you can read
if this is something
you want to brush up on
but I think data
data storage
database
and designing with
thinking about data first
is a really good one
what should we say there
Luciano?
Yeah I think that the main realization
that I personally had
is that almost
every single application
or solution
that I ever designed
required to persist
data
in a way or another
and of course
there are lots of
different trade-offs
and lots of different
ways you can do that
so the business needs
might vary a lot
and therefore
you need to figure out
okay
how do I
effectively
make sure that
I'm satisfying
those business needs
like for instance
sometimes the data
needs to always be
super accurate
and fresh
so how do I design
a data storage
that can fulfill
that particular need
sometimes you need to deal
with large volumes of data
how can I design
a system that scales
to support those
large volumes
other times
you need to keep
the entire history
of changes
for a long period
of time
because maybe
I don't know
you need like an audit trail
how can I implement
that audit trail
into my solution
and I think one of the
realizations that I had
at some point in my career
is that I always thought
okay I need to find
the perfect database
that can solve
all these problems
then learn that database
really really well
and then I can build anything
but the reality is of course
more complex than that
because there isn't really
one solution that fits
them all
so you really need to understand
what are the different
solutions in the market
what are they good at
and then based on
your requirements
very often you need
to combine multiple solutions
to try to get the best
of the different trade-offs
right
which can bring
other complexity
because sometimes
when you have
multiple data storages
you might have a problem
of how do I synchronize
the data
if I need to synchronize
it across multiple systems
or maybe you need
to query multiple data sources
to come up with a view
that makes sense
in your application
so all this stuff
is something
that you will learn
with experience
but the point is
try to think about
again what is it
that you're trying to solve
what are the business requirements
and what tools
are available
that can help you
probably you need
a combination of
these tools
for the specific use case
I'm not going to bore you
with the CAP theorem
but it's another thing
that is probably worth
understanding and exploring
and it's the idea
that by design
distributed storage system
distributed databases
cannot have
all the qualities
that you might expect
from databases
you can only pick
two out of three
between consistency
availability
and partition tolerance
and that's why
there are very different
classes of databases
with different characteristics
so you can pick
whichever one
makes the most sense
for your use case
and your data storage needs
there is a very good book
called
Designing Data Intensive Applications
by Martin Kleppman
it's the very famous
red book
with the boar
on the cover
so chances are
you have seen that online
I think that's
a very good read
if you want to
kind of broaden
your mind
into thinking
about storing data
and all the different
requirements
you might have to deal with.
Something
that becomes more
and more important
for architects
and when you've got
to think about distributed data
distributed systems
you have to think
about networks
because that's how
you distribute things
and an understanding
of networking
is an important thing
to have in your toolbox
you should really understand
like IP addressing
and subnetting
the basics of networking
the OSI stack
TCP IP
to some degree
DNS
and of course
HTTP
which is ubiquitous
personal litmus test
there is
could you explain
everything that happens
this is a classic
interview question
could you explain
everything that happens
when you run a query
on Google
and hit enter
in your browser
or enter URL
into the URL bar
can you describe
all of the steps
that happens
and all the different
network layers
and protocols
that result in
a search result
coming back for you
and we'll have
a pretty good guide
from AWS
in the show notes
for networking essentials
now
you've mentioned
operating systems
as an important tool
is that still the case
even with all these
layers of abstraction
Luciano?
Yeah you might make the point
that it's becoming
less and less important
because of course
there are more and more
abstraction
like function as a service
will abstract
most of what
you need to know
generally about
the operating system
but I still think
that there is
a very strong reason
why you should understand
at least the basics
because I think
you're never going to get rid
of things like
I don't know
even just understanding
how does a process start
this is still something
you need to understand
even with something
like Lambda
because in some cases
it will actually
help you to troubleshoot
why Lambda is not working
or maybe to achieve
certain things
with your Lambda
or another trivial example
is do you understand
the difference
for instance
between memory
and storage
and the different trade-offs
that can happen there
you might end up
writing a Lambda
that requires a lot
of memory
just because maybe
you are not really
paying attention
to the design
of that particular piece
of software
and then maybe
it just crashes
at runtime
and you don't know why
so I think
those are still things
that you should have
some basic understanding of
maybe you don't need
to become an expert
in Linux
or operating system
in general
but you should know
all of this stuff
another thing
that is also relevant
in this space
is Docker
or containers
in general terms
because that's
another very common way
to ship software
in the cloud
you might be using
something like Fargate
which abstracts
the container workloads
a little bit
but you still need
to know quite a lot
about for instance
how Docker works
how to create
a container
how to provision
and run container
how to give it
memory permissions
and so on
and even more so
if you end up
designing for something
like Kubernetes
I think in that case
you need to know
even more about
containers
and operating systems
there are actually
two resources
that I want to suggest
one is the Docker curriculum
which is a free resource
that you can find
I think it's part
of the Docker
official documentation
we'll have a link
in the show notes
and that gives
a very good
and in-depth overview
of how Docker works
and how you can
practically use it
to build applications
and then there is
a book that I happened
to read some time ago
which is actually
quite nice
and it's called
How Linux Works
by Brian Ward
again we'll have
the link in the show notes
okay well two other quick
things quickly then
on the hard skills side
are of course
programming
we mentioned it
a lot of architects
don't get the opportunity
to or don't feel
they have to
develop software
we think you should
try to do as much
as you can
obviously that's just
our take
for our context
isn't the same
in all companies
you don't have to
take our word for it
but the more
hands-on experience
you have
the more you'll be
able to relate to
and communicate
with other members
of the team
we'll have some links
to help you with that
and then security
I think is something
that's unavoidable
as a skill for an architect
it's becoming
the number one
toolkit
tool in the toolkit
really is understanding
security threat modelling
you don't have to be
the expert
but you do have to
understand who to ask
where to look
and when to consider
security
so given those
two hard skills
should we talk
very quickly
about soft skills
Luciano?
Absolutely and we already
mentioned that
this is becoming
more and more
of a
something that
it's being acknowledged
in the industry
that you need
to have soft skills
you need to be able
to communicate well
to be successful
in this kind of careers
I think it's true
for every type
of technical career
but of course
when you are aiming
to be an architect
you are more exposed
to be forward facing
and talking with
different people
both technical
and non-technical
so of course
you need to have
those skills
I was actually
very surprised
while I was looking
online to prepare
the notes
for this episode
I discovered
that there is
a university
I'm not going
to make the name
just because
we don't want
to necessarily
advertise
that is a
technical university
like a software
engineering university
and they have
an entire course
on soft skills
and they try
to cover things
like communication
in terms of
active listening
and clarity
collaboration
in cross-functional
teams
self-awareness
self-regulation
empathy
and relationship
management
I was really
surprised to see
all this topic
being so explicitly
covered in a
technology
type of degree
so this is great
to see
and I think
we should be
putting more
attention to
these topics
even inside
companies
we should encourage
people to talk
more about
these kind of
things
and to have
ways to help
people develop
these skills
because I think
everyone is going
to benefit from that
there are a few
interesting books
that I think
are relevant here
we'll have the
links in the
show notes
for you to
check them out
later
so I think
we are getting
close to the end
so how do we
give people a little
bit more guidance
to put things
into practice
well there's a lot of theory
but in order
to try and
think about
putting it into
practice
we would recommend
you try learning
in small increments
and try to do
some practice
to consolidate
every topic
you learn
we had an episode
episode 58
where we gave
just some examples
of project ideas
to explore
and concepts
in the space
of web application
development
machine learning
and data science
but if you're
already working
in the industry
in other roles
I would try
and actively
seek out
opportunities
to work more
closely with
architects
in your company
and learn from them I'm going to give
you a quick list
of things
you can do
that are a little
bit more practical
and again
feel free to try
other things
this is just
one potential path
you'll need to learn
core concepts
system architecture
databases
networking
security
and so on
I would suggest
try to find
courses online
for instance
a cloud guru
udemy
coursera
whatever
that the web
is plenty
of resources
or books
or whatever
resource works
for you
but try to be
methodical
and spend
two weeks
for every one
of these topics
and then maybe
come back
on rotation
to learn more
don't just try
to focus
on one topic
for a long time
because of course
that topic
can be endless
and you don't
want to find
yourself in a rabbit hole
where you're not
progressing
and building
that more holistic
view of these
foundational topics
in terms of
programming skills
there is plenty
of resources
we'll have some
in the show notes
that can help
you to practice
I would say
try to do
a few coding
challenges per week
even just one
but at least get
into the habit
of doing it
recurringly
especially if coding
is not something
that you get to do
a lot in your
daily job
try to build
that habit
so that you have
the confidence
and you learn
to think
in terms of
solving problems
with code
for AWS
there is a lot
to learn there
and you might
decide to take
a certification
to have a more
guided path
or just try to
explore the
different services
one by one
again the goal
is not to become
an expert
in every single
service
but just to
explore a little
bit the surface
and understand
the use cases
so the same
suggestion applies
try to invest
a limited amount
of time
maybe a week
on a few
fundamental services
one at a time
maybe you start
with EC2
for instance
for a week
then you try
S3 for another
week
then you try
something else
for another week
I think at some
point you will realize
that there are some
services that are
more fundamental
than others
at least that was
for me the case
for instance
with IAM
everything I was
doing I needed
to deal with IAM
and then at that
point I think it
makes sense to spend
a little bit more
time on those
services
deep dive
and really understand
how they work
and how they can
be integrated
with the others
finally I would say
build a portfolio
if you are building
stuff why not
just publishing it
for instance
on GitHub
or maybe write
an article
that describes
your experience
all of that stuff
is going to
solve two purposes
one is going to
help you to
consolidate your
ideas
but also if you
ever need to
showcase what
you built
you already have
it there
and it's nicely
polished
and you can
talk through
about that
with people
this is great
if you are
maybe you want
to start to
work
you want to
start a solo
career as a
consultant
you can use
that as a
way to
showcase
your potential
customers
that you know
your stuff
or maybe if
you are just
trying to get
hired into a
company
so you can bring
into an interview
to prove that
you learned
something useful
for the job
and finally
networking and
community will
go a long way
thankfully in the
AWS space
there is a lot
of activity going
on
there are AWS
user groups
both online
and physically
there is a
web page
published on
AWS with
almost 600
user groups
so most likely
there will be
one close to
you and if
not you can
probably join
some of the
remote ones
so we'll have
a link in
the show notes
okay and that
brings us to
the end of
this episode
and I will
say that
becoming a
cloud architect
is definitely
not a get
reach quick
scheme
it's more
like an
ongoing adventure
you need to
be patient
and keep
learning
growing
and constantly
adapting to
new changes
so of course
it's something
that you should
start today
but you probably
never stop
and that's
actually the
thing that we
personally love
we have been
doing this
job for a
while but we
still feel
we haven't
reached the
point where
we could say
oh we are
the perfect
cloud architect
we are still
learning every
day
there is a
lot that we
don't know
there is a
lot of
experimenting
and trying
to figure
out what's
the best
solution
and I
think that's
probably the
best part
of this
role that
you are
always working
with people
and trying to
solve problems
together and
every time you
get a little
bit better at
it so we
hope this
episode has
been useful
and we look
forward to
hearing about
your journey
as a cloud
architect so
don't be shy
and reach out
to us and
let us know
how it is
going how you
are progressing
and what are
you thinking
to do next
so thank you
so much for
hanging out
with us
today and
until next
time
happy cloud architecting.